---
layout: post
title:  "A week with Python"
date:   2022-04-29
categories: webdev python
---
For the last few weeks, I have been spending my weekends and some free time
with Python.

I'm a full-stack senior web developer, working mostly with Rails and Node at
the moment.

Being a lover of the Ruby programming language, I never really thought about
trying Python. I thought "meh they are very similar, any is fine". And while
that is true to some extent, they are also quite opposite in other aspects,
but in a good way.

Trying Python now feels like a breathe of fresh air.

## Simplicity
In Ruby, everything is an object.

## Syntax
Python likes to do things with their syntax, like:

```python
if 1 in [1, 2, 3]:
  do_something()
```

While in Ruby, you just ask the object, because everything is an object!

```ruby
if [1, 2, 3].include?(1)
  do_something()
end
```

## Windows Support
While there are ways to run Ruby (and even Rails!) on Windows, it has always
been a second class citizen there.

For example, as a professional Ruby developer, you are expected to swap
between different versions to accomodate the needs of your many different
projects, reproduce bugs, perform safe upgrades, etc.

In Linux and macOS, you have tools like `rvm` and `rbenv`. There's no such
thing for Windows.

So I was really surprised to learn that
[pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv-win/pyenv-win) cares about Windows. And not
just them, the Python community as a whole seems to care much more about
Windows. Which IMO is a good thing!

I work with macOS and Linux, but I'm a gamer, my personal computer runs
Windows 11.

As a developer, I like having side projects from time to time, and I like to
do them in my personal computer.

My solution in that case was simple, just use Node. Node has much better
Windows support than Ruby. But it's pleasant to know that I also have another
alternative: Python.

## Bundling and Packaging
In Ruby, you have `gem` and `bundler`, and that's it. Ruby's `gem` command
will install a gem, and `bundler` manages dependencies and versions.

In Python, you have `pip`, which is the equivalent of `gem`, but then you have
lots of different ways to manage packages. `pipenv` would be the closest
equivalent of `bundler`, and what I use at the moment. Haven't had any issue
with it so far, does what it says in the tin.

When starting out, it's not immediately clear which of the several solutions
you should use, but that's fine. It can also be a good thing, not putting all
your eggs in a single basket.

It feels more like JavaScript in that regard. It might also have something to
do that Ruby, while healthy, it's not as popular as it used to be.  Nowadays,
Python and JavaScript are way more popular, and as such, it's natural that it
generates more alternatives.

## Absolute Imports
In Rails, you don't have to worry about imports, but if you manually write
Ruby code, you'll have to import your own files. That is not a big deal, each
file simply references other files using relative paths. Same as in
JavaScript.

Python uses absolute imports. This was a pain in the ass to get used to. In
Python, the root package is the one the file being run live at.

So the imports change depending on what context the file is evaluated. I can't
say I like this, but I assume it's mostly me now knowing enough Python.

## Google Fu
Ruby is a mature language, and most search results are Stack Overflow posts,
or GitHub issues.

For Python, most results are marketing websites and low quality tutorials and
courses.

Not like it's Python's fault. Curiously enough, it doesn't happen to me with
JavaScript, although maybe it's just me being bad at Googling.
